##### PREFACE

The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, the Council of Europe and the United Nations Population Fund jointly convened the European Population Conference during 23-26 March 1993 at the Palais des Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. This Conference was held within the context of world-wide preparations for the United Nations 1994 International Conference on Population and Development, scheduled to take place in Cairo, Egypt, in September 1994.

The Conference addressed the following priority topics: (i) international migration, (ii) fertility and the family, (iii) health and mortality, (iv) population growth and age structure: selected consequences, and (v) international cooperation in the field of population.

The objectives of the Conference were to address these topics and in the process: (i) to review, examine and analyse key population-related issues in countries of the European and North America region; (ii) to evaluate the implementation of population-related policies in the countries of the region; and (iii) to prepare a set of recommendations addressing key population related issues and policies.

The integral text of the recommendations of the European Population Conference is provided in this publication with the hope that it will serve as a useful reference source to government ministries and agencies, international and regional organizations and institutions, as well as national organizations and individual scholars interested in population issues and policies.

RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE EUROPEAN POPULATION CONFERENCE

Adopted by the Conference at its final session on 26 March 1993

##### I. BACKGROUND

1. In the history of the development of the world's population the decade straddling the end of this century will be decisive. Long-term population trends will depend, among other things, on measures and policies introduced during that decade. There' is, therefore, an urgent need for politicians and policy makers at the global, regional and national levels to come to grips with the serious demographic challenges faced and to influence fundamentally the future course of events.

2. The nature of these challenges varies widely. At the global level, the expected tremendous increase in population numbers -- the world's population will grow from 5.3 billion to over 8 billion between 1990 and 2020 -- has driven home the fact that population and the environment are highly inter-dependent and that continued population growth, combined with unsustainable modes of production and consumption leading to environmental degradation through air, soil and water pollution, threatens the very basis on which life depends. It has also led to the realisation that the future of countries is inextricably linked and that this interdependence necessitates international cooperation and solidarity among the different regions of the world.

3.For the developing countries, where over 90 per cent of the future world population growth will take place, the challenge is to generate adequate levels of sustainable economic and social development, notwithstanding high levels of population growth, and to devote sufficient resources to population and development programmes to enable these countries to move towards their own demographic transition. Considerable progress has been made along this path, but in many developing countries no substantial decline of fertility has yet taken place. Entire regions are still experiencing higher levels of fertility than they consider desirable and have such a young age-structure that they find it difficulty if not impossible, to feed, educate and train the coming generations and to provide them with gainful employment.

4. In most of the developed countries the situation is entirely different. They have experienced a sustained period of low, at times unprecedented low, levels of fertility. In many instances, these countries are still evaluating the implications of long--term population decline. At the same time the population is ageing rapidly. Also, Europe is now a region of destination of international migration.

5. A very particular challenge for the region results from the developments taking place in the countries undergoing political and economic transition. The revival of old national and ethnic rivalries not only facilitates the emergence of armed conflicts and serious political crises, but also exacerbates demographic problems. Moreover, countries in transition face the formidable task of having to catch up with the almost uninterrupted social and economic progress experienced elsewhere in Europe in order to offer their populations better standards of living, a less polluted environment and a life free from armed conflict. For Europe as a whole, the existence of this group of countries in transition also poses a formidable challenge which taxes to the limit the solidarity and inventiveness of all Governments of the region. It also makes Europe's demographic situation very complex

6. With due consideration to the most pressing issues both at the global and regional levels, priority areas were selected for discussion during this Conference of the European and North American region, herein referred to as "the region". These were:

- Fertility, status of women and the family;

- Health and mortality;

- Population growth and structure;

- International migration;

- International cooperation; and

- Generation of policy-relevant knowledge.

These areas have strong interrelations, a fact which will be taken into account in the recommendations of this Conference.

7. The last few decades have been marked by very important changes in the societal context of fertility, status of women and the family. Fertility has declined unexpectedly and dramatically, and continues to be well below the level necessary for the replacement of generations. Even though in a few countries slight increases have been observed recently, the general expectation must be that, at least for the immediate future, substantial increases are unlikely as couples do not seem to desire larger families. Fertility regulation is now widely practised in the region. In many countries, however, individuals and couples have no access to or make insufficient use of appropriate methods of fertility regulation. High rates of unintended pregnancy and abortion attest to this problem, notably in eastern Europe.

8. An ever-increasing number of women are trying to achieve personal fulfilment both in their family and professional lives. A great challenge facing society is to create conditions enabling men and women to combine parental and work roles in a responsible manner.

9. New types of family arrangements have emerged, such as non-married cohabiting couples and single parent families; as a result the number of children born from these unions is increasing. Even in areas where this situation does not prevail as yet, such phenomena may soon appear. Clearly the great challenges facing society are to accommodate these pluralistic family forms in all aspects of society.

10. The improvements in health promotion, disease prevention and treatments and their effects on morbidity and mortality levels and trends in most western countries of the region have been very significant and further gains may be expected. Following rapid success in the fight against infectious diseases, advances have also been made in reducing mortality from cardio-vascular diseases and, to some extent, from cancer. The implications of this favourable development are, among others, the increase of chronic and degenerative diseases. Both the general welfare development and the considerable expansion of health services have contributed to health improvements, as has the increased awareness in the population that modified personal behaviour with regard to eating, drinking and smoking has a positive effect on their health.

11. At the same time, new problems have arisen while old problems have become more acute. The AIDS pandemic and drug abuse, particularly among the young, are causes for concern as is the link between environmental degradation and its influence on health and mortality. In many countries of the region there is also the important issue of increasing the availability of quality health care and the financing of health services. This is a particular concern for the countries in transition. Disparities in various demographic indicators, such as maternal and infant mortality and life expectancy, between western and eastern Europe suggest the need for improved health care, including reproductive health services.

12. The continued low levels of fertility and declining mortality at higher ages have direct consequences for population growth and the age structure of the countries in the region. In spite of the diversity which still exists, both at the macro and micro levels, there are closely convergent demographic trends, such as those towards very low or negative levels of population growth and ageing. These trends have important socio-economic and political implications. The aged population constitutes a valuable and important component of a society's human resources. In many countries "ageing policies" are being developed to enable societies to adjust to changes in the composition and size of the labour force. The development of specific "ageing policies" is all the more important since the already high expenditure for health and retirement benefits is likely to increase with ageing. It should be realized that the issue of ageing is complex and is a challenge to those societies in which longevity has been increasing for some time. This achievement leads to new developments in the nature of the social contract which binds generations together.

13. With regard to international migration it was noted that, whatever their inclination, most European countries had, as in the case of the United States and Canada, a considerable net influx of migrants. Because of worldwide economic and social disparities and political conflicts, the region will have to deal with long-term migration pressures from other parts of the world. Obviously the most crucial questions to be faced are how to control and manage the migratory flows to and within Europe in a humane and effective way and how to achieve a desirable level of integration. Apart from family migration which is, or is becoming, the largest flow of legal migration, two other categories of migrants have emerged preeminently on both sides of the Atlantic: asylum-seekers and irregular migrants. Asylum procedures are being increasingly used not only by genuine refugees but also by migrants whose motivation is economic. It is also important to keep in mind that while western Europe, through the European Community and its cooperation with the countries of the European Free Trade Association, is basically committed to the free movement of people within its area, this "openness" is difficult to achieve or maintain. There is a clear need for increased cooperation within Europe in the field of international migration. It is in the interest of both the sending and the receiving countries to see that ways are found to ameliorate the short-term crises and the long-term deprivation which lead to uncontrolled migration flows. Furthermore, countries in transition may be both generating and hosting substantial flows of migrants in the coming years.

14. International cooperation already exists among the countries of Europe and North America and the developing countries, as well as within the region. A major challenge is to continue to support the developing countries in their developmental and population programmes while at the same time intensifying similar activities with the countries in transition. The imbalance between population dynamics and, economic and social development, and its perceived impact at the world level on the environment has contributed to increasing awareness of the complex interdependency between different regions of the world.

##### II. PREAMBLE

15. Considering resolution 1991/93 of the Economic and Social Council inviting the regional commissions of the United Nations to organize, in preparation of the International Conference on Population and Development in 1994, regional conferences to review the experiences gained in population policies and programmes in their regions, bearing in mind the relationship between such policies and programmes and development issues, and to propose further action;

16. Considering decision G (40) of the Economic Commission for Europe, which requested the Executive Secretary to collaborate with the United Nations Population Fund in convening periodically a regional meeting of experts on population for consultations amongst Governments and for the dissemination and exchange of information on population problems and policies in the ECE region;

17. Considering the decision of the Ministers' Deputies of the Council of Europe at their 470th meeting to convene this Conference jointly with the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe and the United Nations Population Fund;

18. Aware of the political changes which have occurred recently in Europe and of their positive impact on the development of cooperation between all countries of the region;

19. Mindful that despite the ,diversities of their socio-economic, political, cultural, demographic and environmental conditions, the countries of the region share important common concerns in regard to population;

20. Aware of the specific needs of the countries in transition in the field of population, particularly in the context of the economic reforms under way there;

21. Mindful also that the developed and the developing countries in the perspective of sustainable development share common ground and interest on population matters, and are desirous to cooperate in this area;

22. Noting the principles of the World Population Plan of Action adopted in Bucharest in 1974 and the 1984 Mexico City Declaration on Population and Development;

23. Noting also the relevance of the 1989 Amsterdam Declaration "A Better Life for Future Generations";

24. Reaffirming, that population policies including migration policies, should be consistent with and observe the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), the International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1966), the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (1950) and its additional protocols, the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (1979), the Convention (1951) and the Protocol (1967) relating to the status of refugees and similar international instruments;

25. Conscious of the principle of equity in health and the policy targets as stated in the Health for All Strategy by the year 2000 of the World Health Organisation and of the European Charter on Environment and Health, Frankfurt, 1989;

26. Stressing the importance of the activities initiated in the context of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe which contribute to the observance of human rights, to conflict prevention, and the improvement of living conditions of the population of the countries concerned;

27. Reaffirming the outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) held in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992, and the commitment demonstrated by this Conference that all concerns of sustainable development, including those related directly to population, should be addressed in a fully integrated manner;

28. Recognising with appreciation the valuable role international governmental organisations, including the Council of Europe and United Nations organisations, and non-governmental organisations have played and can play in promoting greater awareness of the nature of population problems and the need for effective action;

29. Reviewing recent population trends and policies, and future prospects of demographic development in the region, as described in the documents submitted to the Conference and summed up in Section 1. above;

The European Population Conference

30. Adopts the recommendations contained below and requests the Executive Secretary of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe to transmit these recommendations to the Preparatory Committee of the International Conference on Population and Development.

##### III. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ACTION

Recommendation 1

Recognizing that sustainable development on the global scale is a common responsibility to be shared by the Governments of the region and those of the developing countries, the former should actively participate in all necessary joint efforts to be undertaken in this respect. Governments of the region should in particular be aware that poverty, population growth and environmental degradation are closely interrelated. While population growth and poverty result in certain kinds of environmental stress, the major causes of the continued deterioration of the global environment are the unsustainable patterns of consumption and production, particularly in industrialized countries. Common targets should be the promotion of patterns of consumption and production that reduce environmental stress, and the encouragement of social and economic development that meets basic needs and allows for better living conditions and appropriate fertility rates.

Recommendation 2

Population-related activities touching upon the most personal sphere of life should, as a prerequisite, be implemented in accordance with human and fundamental rights. They should in particular contribute to the improvement of the role and status of women, the reduction of large discrepancies in living standards and the peaceful settlement of religions, ethnic, political and economic conflicts.

##### A. FERTILITY, STATUS OF WOMEN AND THE FAMILY

a) Socio-economic support to the family and gender equality

Recommendation 3

A more child-friendly and family-friendly environment should be promoted in all spheres of society such as housing, child-care programmes, working conditions, time schedules and recreational facilities.

Recommendation 4

Governments, in cooperation with the private sector and the social partners, should help the ever-increasing number of parents who desire to achieve fulfilment through both professional life and parental roles. They could contribute to making these two goals compatible by developing and strengthening social services such as child minders, crèches, kindergartens, and parental leave. In addition, they should encourage other measures to facilitate work outside the family by either parent, such as part-time activity and flexible schedules. Particular attention should be given to the needs of women, who still bear a disproportionate burden of the responsibility in the family, by introducing measures which encourage men to share these responsibilities.

Recommendation 5

Governments and private organizations as appropriate, should consider measures which compensate, at least partially, for the costs of child-bearing and child-rearing, particularly for those with limited resources. These measures may include direct financial and other support, tax incentives, and low-cost or free child and maternal welfare services.